Add session mgt guide (#42908)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/security/authentication/session_management/index.md

---
title: Session management
slug: Web/Security/Authentication/Session_management
page-type: guide
sidebar: security
---

> Once a website has authenticated a user, it typically needs to remember that user's identity across the subsequent requests that the user makes to the site. That's the function of a session management system.

Reviewer: This just feels a little awkward. I don't love my words, but have a think about it.

```suggestion
HTTP is a stateless protocol, which means that each request and response pair beween the browser and the website does not depend on previous interactions.
Session management systems provide a mechanism for remembering a user's identity across the multiple requests to a site.
```

Author: hm, I wanted to start by tying session management into authentication, since that's the context here ("you're reading about authentication, and part of that is knowing about session mgt". I don't particularly mind starting with the generic "HTTP is stateless" approach but it would need some additional rework in the intro, or things get incoherent.

In particular, the "Session management systems provide a mechanism for remembering a user's identity..." doesn't follow well from a general statement about statelessness. Why are suddenly talking about identity here?

I think it could work to say something like:

1. HTTP is stateless
2. session management (in general) is a way to add state (in general)
3. a major application for this is remembering that a particular client has been authenticated as a particular user, which is where it's relevant to authentication.

Reviewer: Yes, I saw the intended approach. I do prefer your "could work something like" structure, but you could ignore me and this does do what you want.

Author: does this -> https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/42908/changes/63570e4e3ec82f3b7903a92fd3dae3896c320dd2 make more sense?

> When a website has the ability to authenticate users, so as to grant individuals access to specific data or actions, it typically wants to treat an authenticated user's identity as state that persists across multiple requests from the client. Unlike a choice of theme, though, an authenticated user's identity on the site represents state that is especially valuable to an attacker, so a site author has to be especially careful when implementing a session management solution for authenticated users.

Reviewer: Too especially :-)
```suggestion
When a website has the ability to authenticate users, so as to grant individuals access to specific data or actions, it typically wants to treat an authenticated user's identity as state that persists across multiple requests from the client. Unlike a choice of theme, though, an authenticated user's identity on the site represents state that is especially valuable to an attacker, so a site author has to be very careful when implementing a session management solution for authenticated users.
```

In this guide we'll first describe the most common architecture for session management, in which the user's session state is kept in the server:

- When the user is authenticated, the server records their state and generates a _session ID_, which it associates with this state. The server returns a copy of the session ID to the client. The client stores the session ID.

> - When the client makes a request to the server, the client includes the ID. The server uses this to look up the user's session state, to decide what the client is allowed to do.

Author: > Below you say
> 
> > In targeting session management, an attacker's goal is to be able to impersonate a legitimate user, without having to compromise the website's authentication system itself. In this section we'll describe the two main ways in which an attacker can do this: [_session hijacking_](#session_hijacking) and [_session fixation_](#session_fixation).
> 
> As I understand it now, and what I think you are trying to show here, is that authentication is (can be?) separate to session. The authentication follows some process that confirms identity. The representation of identity is then a session cookie (in this first case). The authentication process might use some credential to identify the user, but the session _becomes_ the credential that is used for subsequently identifying the user
> 
> So in that sentence you're saying that once the session is what represents the user credential, you can attack that rather than the authentication mechanism.

Yes, this is how I understand things.

> 
> It might be worth spelling out in a sentence after this bullet point something along the lines of "Therefore after authentication the session id is the credential used to identify the user, and that defines their accesses".
> 

I will think about this.

> FWIW thanks! One of my big problems with sessions and authentication is that I never really understood how they interacted. We talk about cookies and authentication and credentials, and we separately talk about all sorts of authentication mechanisms that don't use cookies and it wasn't clear how they all fit together (at least for me)

Thanks! It's nice to hear that this is helpful (and I hope it is also correct!)

![Diagram showing session management using server-maintained session state](session-mgt-centralized.svg)

> ## Attacks

Reviewer: I hate that our infrastructure forces this - if not for that I'd still hope for the structure.

Anyway, you have reasons - it doesn't "not work".

In targeting session management, an attacker's goal is to be able to impersonate a legitimate user, without having to compromise the website's authentication system itself. In this section we'll describe the two main ways in which an attacker can do this: [_session hijacking_](#session_hijacking) and [_session fixation_](#session_fixation).

### Session hijacking

Session hijacking is a general term for an attack in which an attacker can take over a legitimate user's session. There are a few common approaches here, but they all involve accessing the session ID value for an authenticated user.

#### Intercepting the session ID

The attacker could steal a session ID while it is being sent between client and server, in a [manipulator in the middle (MITM)](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Attacks/MITM) attack.

The defense against this is to serve the site over [TLS](/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Defenses/Transport_Layer_Security).

#### Predicting the session ID

If an attacker can predict, guess, or brute-force the value of the session ID that's assigned to a legitimate user, then they can use that ID to impersonate them, without having to steal the user's copy.

> The defense against this is to [ensure that session ID values are long enough and random enough to be unpredictable](#session_id_recommendations).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The defense against this is to [ensure that session ID values are long enough and random enough to be unpredictable](#session_id_values).
```

The attacker invents a session ID value and sends the user an email containing a link, with a plausible reason for the user to click the link. The link is to the target website, and includes the attacker-generated session ID as a URL parameter:

```plain
https://target-website.example.org/login?session=ATTACKER-GENERATED-ID
```

If the user clicks the link, the session ID is sent to the website. If the user then signs in, and the website reuses this session ID for the signed-in user, then the attacker can impersonate the user, because they already know the value.

If the website uses cookies, instead of URL parameters, to send the session ID, then this attack is harder: the attacker needs to be able to execute an XSS attack on the target website. This is one reason cookies are a much better method for storing and communicating session IDs than URL parameters.

The key defense against session fixation, though, is that the server must always generate a new session ID, and invalidate any existing value, every time the user signs in.

## Session ID values

The session ID should:

> - Contain enough entropy to protect against [guessing or prediction attacks](predicting_the_session_id). The [OWASP guide to session management](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Session_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html#session-id-properties) recommends at least 64 bits of entropy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Contain enough entropy to protect against [guessing or prediction attacks](#predicting_the_session_id). The [OWASP guide to session management](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Session_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html#session-id-properties) recommends at least 64 bits of entropy.
```

  - Invalidates the old session ID
  - Sends the new session ID to the client.

  This enables a website to limit the period for which a session ID is usable by an attacker, without making the user reauthenticate too often.

All these timeouts should be calculated on the server, and actually expiring the session must take place on the server. For the sake of usability, the client should also clear its session state, but from the point of view of security it is the server state that matters.

Specific timeout periods depend on the sensitivity of the session and its usage profile: the OWASP cheatsheet includes recommendations.

### Invalidation events

In some situations, a website might want to invalidate a user's sessions and require reauthentication:

1. When the client attempts some high-risk operation, such as attempting to change, or actually changing, the user's credentials on the site, or triggering the account recovery process (for example, password reset).

2. When the server has some grounds for thinking that the session ID might have been stolen. This could include, for example, a sign-in from a new IP address or device.

## Decentralized session management

> The model we've described so far might be called "centralized session management": the session state is maintained in a database on the server, and the client is given an identifier for the state, which it gives to the server when it makes a request.

Reviewer: No longer just "might be called"

  - Invalidates the old session ID
  - Sends the new session ID to the client.

  This enables a website to limit the period for which a session ID is usable by an attacker, without making the user reauthenticate too often.

All these timeouts should be calculated on the server, and actually expiring the session must take place on the server. For the sake of usability, the client should also clear its session state, but from the point of view of security it is the server state that matters.

Specific timeout periods depend on the sensitivity of the session and its usage profile: the OWASP cheatsheet includes recommendations.

### Invalidation events

In some situations, a website might want to invalidate a user's sessions and require reauthentication:

1. When the client attempts some high-risk operation, such as attempting to change, or actually changing, the user's credentials on the site, or triggering the account recovery process (for example, password reset).

2. When the server has some grounds for thinking that the session ID might have been stolen. This could include, for example, a sign-in from a new IP address or device.

## Decentralized session management

> The model we've described so far might be called "centralized session management": the session state is maintained in a database on the server, and the client is given an identifier for the state, which it gives to the server when it makes a request.

Author: ```suggestion
In the "centralized session management" model that we've described so far, the session state is maintained in a database on the server, and the client is given an identifier for the state, which it gives to the server when it makes a request.
```
